[Music]
in October 2004 Yasser Arafat fell ill
one month later he was dead no one could
find the root cause I'm Clayton Swisher
my initial investigation suggested the
Palestinian leader was poisoned with
radioactive material it triggered the
exhumation of Arafat's body for testing
and it sparked a French murder inquiry
it's a very complicated case it has
politics intelligence close to PLC's and
a search for the facts we've faced
fierce opposition and we've been placed
under close surveillance but now we have
the final results and our investigation
answers a question that's haunted the
Middle East for nearly a decade what
killed Yasser Arafat what we've got now
is definitely a smoking gun you revealed
the crime of the century
[Applause]
[Music]
when Yasser Arafat died in 2004 most
Palestinians thought it was murdered
the Lenny was buried so are the answers
to their questions
today the Palestinian leadership insists
Yasser Arafat is killed even though we
don't know exactly who where when he
couldn't have shrunk and died without a
substance that they could not identify
ever since present Arafat died in my
heart I knew he was killed but there was
clear evidence that this was a case of
assassination that Arafat was actually
killed by by poison Nasser kid was
Arafat's nephew and in 2004 was also the
Palestinian Authority's foreign minister
as Arafat Lay Dying in this room at the
Persie military hospital in France both
he and the Palestinian chief negotiator
suspected foul play what they did about
it in November 2004 has remained a
secret until now
one night I think was the fourth or the
fifth two o'clock in the morning dr.
nasir could win a very close friend of
mine called me from Paris to my home
Jericho and said sir please call the
Americans and tell them to harass the
Israelis to give us the antidote method
I called their consul general and I told
him please
the man beyond our fat self is
deteriorating we suspected he was
poisoned so please if you can contact
their aliens and get us the antidote
we will appreciate this this is crystal
but if the Palestinian leadership were
privately seeking an antidote it's
exactly the opposite of what they were
telling the public at the time the
doctors today ruled out completely
poisoning so we can also rule out that
cause as well although Arafat died of a
brain hemorrhage
no one could determine the root cause of
the illness that led to his death in
just 31 days hours after Arafat died
French officials issued a death
certificate
his body was washed and presented to the
Palestinian Authority who has courted it
back to Ramallah
despite saying now that they thought it
was murder
the Palestinian Authority met and chose
not to do an autopsy
if French did not really encourage an
autopsy and you know easy to cut up the
the corpse of your historical leader
information that we now know to be false
was also fed to the global media first
of all I want to set the record straight
about the subject of the autopsy all the
newspapers were saying all over the
world that she refused an autopsy did
you ever at any moment in time consider
ordering an autopsy of your late
husband's body no never occurred to me
in the beginning did the doctors ever
ask you and and say to you so how maybe
we should do this no I recommend nobody
an autopsy
no no but not one of the doctor not one
of the doctors nobody nobody no one
suggested no one didn't know because it
was said that somebody suggested autopsy
for me and I would never
I don't think that the issue of autopsy
came up and I would repeat here that
it's not true that's a refused refused
that while the Palestinian Authority
failed to order not Topsy it went on to
form their own commission of inquiry and
after eight years it turned up nothing
whether the investigation that were held
did their job properly or not something
that I'm sure that history will judge
obviously things change drastically when
jazeera declared much later much much
later that it could have been colonial
now polonium definitely was not in
anybody's mind at the time
eyebrow raising new claims about the
death of Palestinian leader Yasser
Arafat al Jazeera reignited the
controversy surrounding Arafat's death
Litvinenko was the first now there are
allegations that there may have been
another high levels of polonium-210
includes the evidence we're gonna have
to dig Arafat up to find that out for
true and this could tip over politics in
that part of the world nobody can
predict what may or may not come of such
action Ramallah the occupied West Bank
July 2012 this is the tomb that houses
Yasser Arafat's body it also holds the
key to finding out if the Palestinian
leader was poisoned with the radioactive
element polonium 210
although polonium is one of the
deadliest substances known to man
it disappears quickly by 50% every 138
days so scientists need to exhume
Arafat's corpse and quickly begin their
specialized tests we have to do it quite
fast because bunim is decaying so if we
wait any possible pool will disappear
[Music]
based on their projections the
scientists set a deadline at the end of
2012 to do the exhumation Doha cuts are
July 3rd the story has just broken
Arafat's Widow Suha is leading a
campaign to get her husband's body
exhumed
time is not on their side and neither is
her late husband's nephew Hockaday know
my pedometer jasira carefully in Miranda
man you polish a kill and maim and kill
and about a Sioux City oh well
and no fear can be at the polonium we
must our Mayan Heather
I'm Olivia I worship and lay upon what
we had that the hill rather had a llama
had anything despite the opposition Suha
presses on you know nothing
diploma I am the wife for me it's
there's difference I respect his opinion
but my opinion is I don't want any 1%
doubt about this story I want to reveal
this for the whole world and this is my
will be my button Paris France
July 6 three days since we broke the
story the Palestinian Authority praises
Al Jazeera's film Andrey commits itself
to discovering the truth its leader
Mahmoud Abbas arrives to hold his first
official meeting with the new French
president Francois Hollande he presented
to him with a new facts of Al Jazeera
documentary and carried him they have
any things they haven't told us to
please fall it to us
July 10th Arafat's Widow Suha arrives in
France
she believes pursuing a criminal
investigation in the country where her
husband died and where she's also a
citizen is the quickest way to the truth
her lawyers explain the options
I just met with one of the best criminal
lawyers in Paris and we agreed that we
have to go further with the file it's a
criminal file now we have to establish
that crime was committed to get this map
it's a very complicated case it has
politics intelligence conspiracies and
lt arrests from all sides of the
equation so it is not an easy case
Doha Qatar July 22nd the Palestinian
delegation attends an Arab League
meeting Mahmoud Abbas's office has
refused repeated requests for an
interview President Abbas how does your
English how are you as the Arab League
could investigate Yasser Arafat's
suspicious death
the Palestinian Authority leader goes on
to propose his own rival plan to
establish the facts he will officially
request to begin formation of an
international commission the full of the
matter we need to go to the Security
Council the Palestinian Authority wants
to persuade the United Nations to take
the case our motions backed with the
findings of the digital documentary as a
very very strong valid chances of
passing Paris July 31st
sois Arafat and her lawyers disagree
with the Palestinian Authority they
believe the United Nations will work to
slowly losing critical evidence in the
meantime we cannot wait forever as the
evidence and the strength of the poison
will reduce immensely by each day by
each hour Suha and her legal team
decided to take matters into their own
hands filing a criminal complaint
directly to a French judge in August 28
the investigating magistrate gives an
answer
breaking news from Europe
today french prosecutors opened an
inquiry to find out whether he was
murdered
Yaya alibi let's put it that image for
this thing yes and other felonies a
murder investigation into whether Yasser
Arafat was poisoned in Paris
September 14th three judges are now in
charge of a French legal case that could
become a murder trial their first action
is the summon sua Arafat to court the
first question what do you know about
the last meal of Yasser Arafat so I said
I know nothing about the last meal of
yes that offense because I was up there
September 25th the Percy military
hospital French detectives searched the
building where Arafat died focusing on
the labs that are tested what astonished
me the most you remember when you came
we've met in Paris and I gave you the
official letter of Mercy Hospital they
are incapable to give us any kind of
blood or urine samples because they have
been destroyed
but they were not all destroyed and
French police discover some during the
search
they got biological samples of his body
and it's more than 100 biological sample
despite the revelation the cells that
remain are not enough for radiological
tests exhumation remains their only
option and for that they will have to go
to Ramallah
[Music]
it's October 25th 2012 nearly four
months have passed since our documentary
aired where the Swiss scientist said
that the exhumation of Yasser Arafat
must take place as rapidly as possible
that clearly hasn't happened yet the
mausoleum and grave of Yasser Arafat
just behind me still is untouched it's
our first day here but already we're
facing problems we have permission to
film at Yasser Arafat's grave but while
we are shooting presidential guards step
in after some discussion they insist we
move back the next day security forces
tell us we cannot film at all we're told
the French are going to come to present
Arafat's grave today to start taking
measurements and coming up with a plan
to exhume his body but the Palestinian
Authority and the French refused to
allow our cameras access so we've set up
this camera in a van 300 metres away
with direct line-of-sight
to observe and monitor who goes in and
who goes out a president Arafat's
mausoleum in the end the French forensic
investigators never turn up November 5th
we spot the Swiss forensic team crossing
an Israeli checkpoint into the West Bank
later that day we observed them visiting
Arafat's tomb we try to film them but
once again the secret police are not
happy to see us what's he asking for
who's this yes it
now now tickets we're again told to
leave the Swiss scientists returned at
dusk and take measurements from the
earth we tracked them down to this hotel
but we cannot approach them with
security guards present so we speak with
them outside their rooms they are not
allowed to to speak a few doors within
moments the guards arrive November 10th
it's the eve of the eighth anniversary
of Arafat's death
the foundation Nasser Kidd was set up in
his name is hosting an event the guest
list is a who's who of Arafat's former
staff and advisors as well as leading
politicians some are reluctant to
discuss the exhumation the man leading
the Palestinian investigation and
coordinating the exhumation is toffee -
owie
most recently he has been telling the
press that they may even block access to
the body and will never know the truth
and they say you don annasaheb afeared
your matter before dolly she wrote
inside before a packed auditorium Nasser
kid will makes his strongest appeal yet
to stop the exhumation
that night the senior Palestinian
leadership sit down to decide on what to
do
despite kid was pleased they finally
agreed to exhume Arafat's body with all
the consequences it may bring November
11th the Palestinian Authority marks
eight years since Arafat's death Mahmoud
Abbas will use the commemoration to
announce the decision to exhume Nasser
Kidd WA is scheduled to speak but first
there's a heated exchange with toffee
Joey and then with Saab Eric OTT
and finally with President Abbas himself
in the end kid would chooses not to give
a speech at all President Abbas will do
all the talking
[Music]
this is the first time we have heard
anything about a Russian investigation
the Palestinian Authority has invited
forensic experts from Moscow
it is perhaps because they are skeptical
of the French who claimed to have
destroyed but later found Yasser
Arafat's samples and they see the Swiss
scientists as linked to al jazeera
[Music]
Mohammad d'Armes is a journalist who's
covered the Palestinian Authority for
decades
he explains their hostility I admit with
seniors who believed that aljazeera did
it intentionally to to create an Arab
Spring here in Palestine they had these
fears that al Jazeera is trying to play
in our yard
but in spite of any perceived political
games the Palestinians are still agreed
on the exhumation
except for Nasser killer it is much
better than what effectively
to trying to do an extra step if it is
needed and it's not by examiner but are
you bore satisfied with the approach
that President Abbas out laid today
where they'll be French Swiss and
Russian investigators coming I'm not in
favor of exhuming the body in principal
November 12 with the decision made the
Palestinian Authority starts preparing
the ground ensuring their work is hidden
from public view
November 13th we realize we're being
followed
they are talking about to a microphones
coordinating with other cars if they are
trying to be discreet is not really
working but they may just be trying to
intimidate us we staged bogus journeys
around Ramallah during the first a
silver vehicle pursues our cameraman
on the second were tailed by a black car
the giveaways when we get to the
roundabout or keep around ones and it
happens again with a different vehicle
one more time one more time one more
time yep there we go now that's not
obvious we're going in a circle and
they're still going in a circle knowing
we're being tailed and fearing the
agents may go further we conceal a
camera in a bag in our room while we are
out it is triggered by a man in a hotel
uniform he has tools and appears to
adjust something near our equipment
minutes later two others come in and
actually make the bed but then another
person arrives and searches our bag we
recognize him he's the driver of the
black car later on our cameraman
confronts him
today the Palestinian Authority is going
to great lengths to investigate the
journalists behind the story rather than
the story itself but why we identify a
fifth person who entered our room and
find him later outside the hotel that is
exactly the guy stop how's it going guys
know what why are you following us who
are you go go here you find me go to
your room the Palestinian Authority is
anxious
there is little time left to discover
what killed Yasser Arafat are you
following me and the Palestinian
Authority knows the truth could have
profound implications for its future as
well as that in the middle
mvenpick Hotel Ramallah November 19th
Palestinian security forces have tailed
our cars and searched our rooms when we
confront them they insist they're with
the hotel when the manager confirms they
are not his employees we know they are
spying on us and at a time when the
deadline is fast approaching to get
Yasser Arafat's body exhumed and tested
into your rooms following your card the
Palestinian Authority is growing nervous
with the media any Palestinian would
tell you that the Israelis killed our
fans but when you ask him further
questions of course he would think that
some Palestinian around Arafat was the
tool Arafat spent his final years under
siege in his compound he died while in a
jail enforced by the Israelis he dived
while every substance that he imbibed
came through the Israelis he died why
even his water came through the Israelis
his medicines came through the Israelis
he was not free of the Israelis when he
died but it was Arafat's
inner circle who had final control over
access food and medicine
they were his last line of defense
so the Palestinian Authority's anxiety
could stem from the possibility that one
of his closest aides may have also
conspired to kill him if the poison is a
much more like a conventional poison
that had to be put in his food after it
has arrived then it could have possibly
been a collaborator the fear of finding
an enemy within may also explain why
they avoided an autopsy back in 2004 one
of the excuses given at the time was
that it would have been prohibited under
Islam that was false shaked a seer
Tamimi was Arafat's trusted cleric and
was the last minute touches body before
it's burial she met each other you can
have a partnership Anakin Forrester
shadow is a servant I thought and Adam -
we just follow his heart come here our
investigation has revealed that
Palestinian leaders made a deliberate
decision not to conduct an autopsy they
believe they were sacrificing the truth
for a greater cause what would have the
implications have been had an autopsy
been done had they had found poisoned
president Arafat's body if if this had
happened I would think that it would
have meant the end of the the peace
process as it stood at that time because
because the Palestinian people would
have would have seen with their own eyes
a huge betrayal and a big crime
committed against them the crime of
killing their own so they waved goodbye
to Arafat as well as the opportunity to
obtain material evidence that their
leader was murdered we all cried our
hearts for the death of our leader
obviously there was a tragedy to us but
the question really then was how to
continue how to move on and that is
really the question that needed to be
tackled at the time
what did they go beyond avoiding the
truth to actively covering it up but I
think this is really a bizarre and
sinister assumption we felt that going
it out into an autopsy would really make
it very difficult for the people and
very difficult for the memory of our
effort and would turn what is a
martyrdom case into a police criminal
case and really people were not really
ready at least in our mind for turning
this into a criminal police case nine
years later whether they wanted it or
not
it has become a criminal case
Lausanne November 23rd it was the work
of these Swiss scientists that opened
the door to a French murder
investigation having visited Ramallah
once already they're now preparing to
head back for the exhumation it will
prove once and for all whether or not
the Palestinian leader was poisoned with
polonium 210 to be honest we we are not
going to Ramallah being totally
confident in finding pollen it's
actually the opposite we waited for a
long time the perineum if it is present
is decaying fast
the Swiss set a deadline of the end of
2012 for the exhumation it's now late
November and although it looks like
they're going to get the samples in time
it's going to be close time is also
running out for the separate murder
investigation that was initiated by
French prosecutors
Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport November
25th the French have refused to disclose
any details of their investigation but
we tracked down their team of judges and
forensic experts as they begin the
journey to Ramallah
along with the Swiss and Russian teams
the French will receive tissue from
Arafat's body for analysis Ramallah
November 26 it's the eve of the
exhumation and three teams are on the
ground there are the Swiss scientists
whose initial analysis of Arafat's
belongings for Al Jazeera suggested
polonium poisoning there are the French
judges in forensic experts who were
assigned to the case when France later
opened a murder investigation and there
is a Russian team personally invited by
President Abbas at the very last moment
each team is required to follow the
strict terms of their host inferentially
allahu and yes and well and Yaqoob are
you done well and yes the elephant's
painting the Palestinian Authority
insists that only one man is allowed to
touch the body or take samples they
designate a university pathologist dr.
Saba Alleluia he first met Arafat as a
medical student and the PLO helped
finance his studies can a young one saw
what appeared in an engineer while Jaime
hunted up kafir not be fat cover Obama
from the additional for this thing
dr. Alleluia makes one final inspection
at the mausoleum
later the Swiss French and Russian
forensic teams join him at around
midnight workmen start digging and at
5:00 a.m. they opened the tomb muchacho
cha Haeju Alma who fought when
especially picanha two men robbed a yen
hyatt e-mart oveja and AMA Domestos Asad
Abu Ammar at our Lockett Ricardo Yamato
jimena endemic Anto Taliban while Takei
to be hidden morale Allah who inhabited
the Khalid Al Arabiya
were compelled to Jerry no patentee her
engineer Jerrod char - Melissa - alpha
welcome Brianna we are nearly so far
condemned men feel and how many women
feel are welcome to be here when it's
raw autonomy and yet to be so for
continual call the roms and world it
will share with Philistine well in the
island back Mele haqiqat right
November 27th Daybreak's along with the
news that the exhumation has gone
according to plan the body of former
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat are not
expected the doctor has distributed 60
samples the Swiss French and Russian
teams leave with 20 each they also have
DNA to confirm the corpses Arafat's
so 147 days have passed since the
broadcast of our film what killed Arafat
this was scientist said to miss Arafat
the conclusion that if she wanted to
know the final proof the best way was to
exhume the body and take samples they've
done that just now and it'll be several
more months so we know the results at a
press conference the same day it's a
feat to rally vows that if the results
are positive
the Palestinian Authority will take
their case to the International Criminal
Court never be as Olivia who wore a
yarmulke junetta Dodi Washington April
29 2013 the chances that Arafat's case
will ever see The Hague greatly diminish
Arab leaders have come to support
negotiations with Israel and as a
condition to get started the Palestinian
Authority agrees to suspend any attempts
to join the International Criminal Court
Malta June 15th 2013 almost seven months
have passed since the samples were taken
scientists are still carrying out their
complex tests - some Yasser Arafat was a
leader and a hero to others an enemy and
a terrorist but he was also a husband
and a father
his daughter Zhou it was just 8 when he
died
she's now 17 and the memories are still
vivid I woke up one morning and that's
so my family member is sitting in the in
the living room in black or crying and
at that time I knew that my mom wanted
to see my dad and then they told me that
welcome come since then my uncle gave me
the phone and it was my mom and she
didn't have to say anything I just burst
into tears and I said to my mom did he
really die and she said yes I cried then
what's wrong I went to come for the
funeral there was my mom and millions of
people join us when I saw the coroner
arriving and the music behind it the
medicine national anthem
I started crying guy burst into tears
Sawa grew up in four different countries
never knowing what had killed her father
I was only eight so I didn't really
understand what was going on that story
slowly I began to ask what happened to
my father
why why did he die
who killed him if he if somebody killed
him what happened why as well as the
uncertainty she had to endure the taunts
he was a terrorist it was corrupt he
wasn't in a good leader he was
homosexual he had AIDS all these things
pretty soon my mom and I are going to
get the results after nights just
because I don't know what's going to
happen if if they're good if the result
will be negative or positive but at the
same time I feel very excited because I
will know I will finally know what's
happened to him what's happened to my
dad Yerevan a new development brings me
to the Armenian capital we were
expecting results from Switzerland
months ago but the news from Luzon is
that they will be delayed for more
testing and verification in the meantime
a man from the former Soviet Union
contacts me online he says he can access
leaked findings from the Russian
scientists study of Arafat's remains the
Palestinian Authority brought Russia in
to conduct a third examination on top of
the French and Swiss studies but the
Kremlin has refused any access to their
scientists so the leak could be
significant after months of
communication I decide to meet the
source
he asked and we agreed to hide his
identity we spend hours checking that
neither of us is being followed unsure
of the risks of releasing classified
material
he shows us 15 pages said to be the
summary findings from the Russian lab
after we convinced him to speak to us on
camera they were not only restricted in
how they presented the report they were
also given an incomplete selection of
samples the document shows they measured
only four of a total of 20 it's not
clear what happened to the other 16
samples in the four that were tested the
readings of polonium-210 and Arafat's
bones are unusually low even less than
what scientists would expect from
background levels nonetheless the
scientists write that the results are
inconclusive what is the - RS Ebola
whooping postponed wasting the money
Yodas thought since ye I wish you knew I
didn't miss Redman's of that movie the
Restless cool
five double G's I bet you bula do it we
would be the we would Geneva Switzerland
November 4th it's the eve of the results
and the Swiss are finally ready to
present the exhumation report it's been
a long wait with a lot of delays which
we're told is owing for the complexity
of their tests
this is Arafat's attorney will meet with
the Palestinian Authority and the Swiss
tomorrow afternoon but the Palestinian
Authority has insisted al Jazeera be
frozen out
you cannot film or attend thanks for
coming out to Geneva professor Dave
Barclay is also here he's a leading
forensic scientist with decades of
experience in the British crime
investigation services and he's followed
the case closely since the beginning of
our investigation I used the opportunity
to show him the Russian report for his
reaction to the 15 pages that reach an
inconclusive conclusion the choice of
bone fragments that they're chosen to
use is very odd and the levels they've
got appear to be 10 or 20 times less
than you'd expect
just from anybody else in the world so I
think the results are meaningless
November 5th in Geneva the Arafat family
lawyer Saud Jabbar sets off he will
collect the final report along with the
Palestinian Authority after a
presentation from the Swiss scientists
in Paris Arafat's Widow and daughter sue
honza wa-wait and wonder what the
findings will be for them this day is
the climax of a two-year fight for the
facts and nearly a decade of not knowing
hours later and Saad Jabbar has received
the report he meets up with Professor
Barkley and the two men begin the
journey to Paris to deliver the findings
for four hours they pour over the
details of the report preparing to
explain its significance
as the Paris evening draws in it's a
tense wait for su Hans ah WA they hope
this study will offer more answers to
their questions by late evening Saad
Jabbar and professor Berkeley make it to
Paris ready to break the news my
principal task is to look at take a
forensic overview of cases I've been
through that in great detail and I hope
I can now explain to you its conclusions
if you remember back in last year we
found the presence of polonium-210 in
various body fluids from things taken at
the time the results were very high and
in my view not only were they very high
but the pattern of those results in
there was a urine stain if you remember
in a blood stain and so on could not be
manipulated in any way you couldn't have
fiddled it had you kept the samples in
your possession for 5 or 6 years nothing
you could have done would have
manufactured those results this year
we've been working on samples from the
excavation itself and there are very
high levels also in his bone and fluid
that came down as his body was lying and
those patterns too are not only very
high but they are characteristic of him
having a dose of polonium just before he
died so those levels are about 36 times
what you'd expect in
a normal person all the samples from yes
arafat are way above those from other
people and one other thing points to
this being an assassination you can
calculate what the level should be in
those stains and in his bones assuming
he had been given a fatal dose way back
in 2004 when you do that calculation you
get a figure which might be the cause of
his death and the figures we get from
him when we actually observe them are
smack in the middle of what they should
be if he was given a fatal dose
so nothing we've got suggests that this
is other than an administration of
polonium which has caused the death of
Yasser Arafat can you hold your hand out
and just that the amount of polonium in
that Inc would be enough to kill you so
it is so easy to get polonium into
somebody in drink maybe a tenth of one
grain of sugar would be enough how
strong is this Evans in legal terms and
it's unusually strong because everything
was perfect from the exclamation all the
way to the lab the labs themselves are
the very best in the world so I don't
have any doubt that we had a smoking gun
back a year ago now I'm absolutely
certain this is beyond any doubt in my
opinion that it was polonium that caused
the death of Yasser Arafat and we had a
smoking gun we've just got to find out
as you suggested who was holding that
gun
I think you revealed the crime of the
century fill the crime of the century
you'll be nice to solve it - yes
[Music]
I think that person author she has to go
till the end to know the truth about it
and I think they have stopped any kind
of negotiations with Israel until they
know what's going on who did it why did
why I don't know who did it but I mean
they have to take a very firm measures
to begin a very very serious
investigation for this for this crime
for soo Hans hour their faith now has to
rest here at the gates of the French
justice system the murder inquiry in
Paris remains the best hope for finding
out who killed Yasser Arafat now that
the results are known this is a French
case and it is for the French judiciary
to take their own decision any judge
will conclude that there is a case to
consider that Arafat was assassinated
and they have to start the process of
like to find out
once the French investigation is done
there is the option of the International
Criminal Court but that remains a
distant prospect today we know what
killed Yasser Arafat the question now
for Suha and zawa for the French
investigators and for the world is who
killed him
[Music]
you